The next train ride of my trip was the longest: New York to Chicago on Amtrak’s Lake Shore Limited train 49, scheduled for 19.5 hours. I boarded at Penn Station from the lower platform to get ahead of the crowds (a trick Meha taught me). On this train they assigned us a car to sit in based on our final destination, but we could sit anywhere in the car. We made an on-time departure at 3:40pm.


I got a window seat on what I thought was the left-hand side of the train so that I could face west and look out over the Hudson River for the first part of our trip. Unfortunately I didn’t realize that the train runs with the cars facing backwards until they spin them around in Albany, so I was actually facing east. With sunset at about 4:30, this didn’t matter much anyway, but I’d be careful to do it differently if I did this ride in the summer. Facing west on the way out of New York sets you up to face east after they do the maneuver in Albany, which could provide views out over Lake Erie in the summer when the sun rises earlier. This train runs once per day on the same schedule, so the only changing variable is the amount of daylight you have.


The coach section of this train was quite similar to the Northeast Regional trains I’m used to, but with a bit more legroom.  The café car was similar too, but with Amtrak’s national menu for long-distance trains rather than the slightly different menus used on the Northeast Corridor.  The major difference was that this train also had sleeper cars and a dining car for meal services for sleeper car passengers.  Though Amtrak will sometimes allow coach passengers to pay for meal service in the dining car, that was not offered on this trip.  The conductor did allow me to go in and take a look around the dining car though. 


Since we were seated by destination, many of the people around me were also going all the way from New York to Chicago.  It was interesting to see who else was taking such a long trip. There was a guy immediately next to me who boarded with a group of several people, all about my age, all French-speaking. Within a few minutes of our departure from New York, they were seated on the floor of the aisle playing cards. I figured they must be used to train travel and were probably wondering why our trains are so slow here. Before long, they discovered the café car, so I didn’t see much of them and had the seat next to me open for most of the ride, which was nice. I talked with two older ladies across the aisle from me more. They didn’t know each other prior to boarding, but both of them were on the train because they had planned to fly somewhere before realizing that they didn’t have a Real ID or passport and were unable to adhere to the new ID requirements for air travel. And there were a lot of Amish and/or Mennonite travelers (I have a hard time differentiating) whose religious beliefs don’t allow for flying under most circumstances.  I talked to one of them and did my best to explain my software engineering job to him while he did his best to explain his archery business to me.  I found that many people on the train were friendly and initiated conversation – a good way to pass the long ride.

Once the sun set, I took some time to book my onward train trips from Chicago.  Unlike normal Amtrak bookings, there’s no price difference for booking just a day or two in advance when using the 10 ride pass.  There is a risk that there won’t be seats available though, so I figured I better get my tickets locked in.


I had a decent night of sleep on the train.  The seats recline pretty far, and they’re far enough apart that you don’t have to feel bad about doing it.  I woke up to the sunrise in western Ohio, where we passed through huge tracts of farmland with visibility for miles.  Part of my motivation for this trip was to see some wide-open spaces, so I got a coffee and sat in the café car looking out for a while.


We arrived into Union Station in Chicago around 11:00am, about 45 minutes delayed.  Amtrak delays are often attributable to the prioritization of freight traffic by the freight railways that own the rail lines, a practice that is in violation of federal laws that are virtually never enforced.  Our delay in this case seemed to be partially due to that practice.  Fortunately my hosts for Chicago, my friends Rohan and Hannah, were flexible on schedule.
